Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are going
to be talking about a battle of David vs.
Goliath.
This is the story of a farmer
and a lawyer fighting DuPont, a
multibillion-dollar chemical company.
It’s a story of perseverance,
deceit, poison, bravery, corporate
greed, and one of the greatest
cover-ups in American history.
So, let’s not waste a minute
and get right into it.
The 1950s and 1960s were a golden
era for new kitchen gadgets.
Armed with disposable income and
a lust for convenience, American
consumers snapped up microwaves,
fridge freezers, and Tupperwares.
Adverts proclaimed that new cheap
plastic forks and knives would mean
families would never have to wash up
again; you’d unwrap a new set of cutlery
with every meal, then simply throw
it away when you were done with it.
And there was more.
One company, DuPont, produced
a magical type of frying pan
that food wouldn’t stick to.
No longer would your morning fried
egg get stuck to the pan and burn,
no longer would you have to scrub
and soak the pan after every meal.
These pans, Teflon pans, they
were called, were “non-stick”.
The adverts boasted of “saving you
a load of dirty work”, and showed
quite how easily even the toughest
of foods could be simply wiped away.
Unsurprisingly, they
were an immediate hit.
By the early 1960s, these
pans were everywhere.
In the US, it’s estimated that by the end
of that decade, over 60% of households
had at least one Teflon-coated pan
in their kitchen; tens of millions
of families flipping pancakes and
frying bacon on this miracle surface.
DuPont couldn’t make them fast enough;
production soared, and by the 1970s,
Teflon was a global phenomenon.
The company’s own figures suggest
that by the late 20th century,
over 90% of American kitchens
had embraced nonstick cookware.
It was cheap, it was clever, and it
promised a life free of culinary drudgery.
What was not to like?
Well, it turns out that
there was something.
But before we get into exactly what it
was, we must move out of the kitchen
and fast forward a few decades, to the
9th of October, 1998, to the office
of Rob Bilott, a 33-year-old lawyer.
He had gone to law school and landed a job
at a prestigious firm in Cincinnati, Ohio.
He hadn’t gone to Harvard or Yale or
any of the typical universities that
lawyers at his firm had attended.
He had gone to Ohio State,
a large public university.
He was something of an anomaly, but he
was hardworking, trustworthy, and he was
a few months away from being made partner.
It was a good job.
Long hours, of course.
But it was very well-paid, and
with a young family and a wife who
had taken a career break to look
after their young boy, and plans
to move to a much bigger house,
well, the money would come in handy.
And on the 9th of October, 1998, Bilott
was sitting at his desk in his office.
His phone rang, his direct personal line.
Usually, it was a secretary, sometimes a
family member, or a longstanding client.
The number wasn’t public
information, you see.
But today, it was a voice
he did not recognise.
It was a man, and he spoke in an accent
unlike any of Bilott’s typical clients.
He spoke with a distinctive
southern drawl, the strong accent
of the Appalachian Mountains
in West Virginia, and he called
him “Robbie” instead of “Rob”.
Nobody called him Robbie.
Only his nearest and dearest.
The man went straight into it.
He was a farmer, a cow farmer.
His cows were dying, and
he needed Rob’s help.
Bilott was confused.
He wasn’t a farmer, he wasn’t
a vet, he was a lawyer.
The man must have the wrong number.
He was just about to hang up,
then the man mentioned the
name of Bilott’s grandmother.
His ears pricked up,
and the man continued.
He was a farmer outside
Parkersburg, in West Virginia.
He'd got Bilott’s number through a
friend who knew Bilott’s grandmother,
and, being proud of her grandson working
at a fancy law firm in the big city,
although she didn’t really know what
Billot did, she'd told her friend to
tell the farmer to “give Robbie a call”.
The farmer’s name was Wilbur “Earl”
Tennant, and his cows had been
mysteriously dying in terrible ways.
Their teeth had turned black,
their eyes sunk inside their head.
In two years, at least 150
had died, inexplicably.
Earl knew something was wrong, and
he had even been performing primitive
autopsies on the dead cows, cutting them
open to see if there were any clues.
What he found was horrifying.
Swollen organs, the build-up of strange
yellow liquid, dark spots on the lungs.
Earl couldn’t be sure, but
it looked like cancer to him.
He thought it was coming from
the water the cows were drinking.
The stream that ran through his
land, water that had once been
crystal clear, was a murky kind
of colour and had a strange foam.
The cows drank this water,
then died in their droves.
Earl thought the water was poisoned,
and he knew who was doing it.
There was a landfill that
was leaking into the stream.
It was meant to be a landfill
for non-hazardous waste: paper,
general rubbish, and so on, but
clearly, something very nasty
was coming out of that landfill,
something that was killing his cows.
The landfill was owned by
DuPont, one of the largest
chemical companies in the world.
Earl wasn’t the sort of man to sit
idly by while his livelihood crumbled.
He’d been raising cattle for
decades, and he knew his land
like the back of his hand.
This wasn’t a case of bad luck or poor
farming; something was seriously amiss.
He’d gone to the local authorities,
spoken to neighbours, even called
in a vet or two, but no one
could give him a straight answer.
The stream, which had once been a lifeline
for his herd, was now a suspect, and
the landfill upstream, owned by DuPont,
was the only thing that made sense.
But DuPont wasn’t just any company.
It was a titan: billions in revenue,
tens of thousands of employees, a name
synonymous with corporate America.
And Earl Tennant, well, he
was a small-time cow farmer.
Bilott listened as the man on
the phone poured out his story.
He could hear the desperation in
the man’s voice, the rough edge
of someone who’d been fighting
a losing battle for too long.
Earl explained how he’d tried to
get help locally–lawyers, officials,
anyone–but no one would touch it.
DuPont was too big, too powerful,
and Parkersburg was its town.
The plant employed half the area,
directly or indirectly, and the idea
of challenging them was unthinkable.
But Earl wasn’t most people.
He’d tracked down Bilott through this
tenuous family connection, hoping
“Robbie” might be the one to listen.
Bilott wasn’t sure what to make of it.
He wasn’t an environmental lawyer,
nor did he have any experience
with cows or water quality.
His world was contracts and boardrooms.
And, what’s more, his job was
to defend companies like DuPont,
against people like Earl.
Hanging up would’ve been the easy
thing; politely excuse himself, wish
the man luck, and get back to his day.
But that mention of his
grandmother stuck with him.
It wasn’t just a name drop; it
was a nod to his own past, a
reminder of where he’d come from.
So, against his better judgement,
he said he’d take a look.
“Send me what you’ve got,” he
told Earl, expecting maybe a
few letters or a water sample.
What arrived was something else entirely.
A few days later, boxes landed
on Bilott’s desk, tattered,
heavy, and stuffed to the brim.
There were handwritten notes,
photographs, and, most unsettlingly,
video tapes Earl had recorded himself.
The footage was shaky but vivid:
dead cows sprawled across the
field, their bloated bodies a
stark contrast to the green grass.
There were close-ups of blackened
teeth, hollowed-out eyes, and those
amateur autopsies: Earl cutting into
the carcasses with a kitchen knife,
pulling out blackened or bloated organs.
Alongside the tapes were jars of
murky water from the stream, labelled
with dates and angry scrawls.
It was a mess, but it
was a compelling one.
Bilott couldn’t unsee it.
He started digging.
His first step was cautious.
He used his position as a corporate
lawyer to request information from DuPont.
He knew the system, he knew how
to phrase things to get a response
without raising too many eyebrows.
What came back was a trickle of
paperwork–standard reports about
the landfill, assurances it was
all above board, nothing hazardous.
But Bilott wasn’t satisfied.
He pushed harder, filing formal
legal requests, and that’s when he
stumbled across something odd: a
chemical name buried in the documents.
PFOA.
Perfluorooctanoic acid.
It didn’t mean much to him at first,
just another jargon term in a sea
of corporate babble, but it kept
cropping up, tied to the Parkersburg
plant and the production of Teflon.
Teflon, that nonstick wonder from the
1950s, the one that had taken over
kitchens worldwide, relied on PFOA.
It was the secret sauce, the thing
that made Teflon slick and effortless.
DuPont had been using it since the 1940s,
churning it out in massive quantities
at plants like the one near Earl’s farm.
By the 1990s, it was a
cornerstone of their business, a
multi-billion-dollar industry built
on frying pans and convenience.
But as Bilott sifted through the
papers, he began to suspect there
was more to PFOA than met the eye.
He wasn’t a chemist, but he
could read between the lines,
and something seemed off.
But he was conflicted.
He was a company man, or
at least, he had been.
His job was to protect firms
like DuPont, not fight them.
Chemical companies paid his bills,
which paid for his house, his
car, his very comfortable life.
But this was different; it
seemed deliberate, callous, and
right there in black and white.
He couldn’t walk away.
In August 1999, he took a leap: he filed
a federal lawsuit against DuPont on
behalf of Earl Tennant, the cow farmer.
It was a small case, focused on one
farmer and his cows, but it was a start.
At first, Bilott only had hints; PFOA in
the water, dead cows, DuPont’s denials.
But as the case unfolded, he dug deeper,
and what he found was staggering.
DuPont’s own records, internal
studies they hadn’t intended for
public eyes, showed they’d known
about the dangers of PFOA for years.
As far back as the 1960s, their
scientists had flagged it as toxic.
Lab tests on rats and rabbits linked it to
liver damage, cancer, and birth defects.
By the 1980s, they had data on
their own workers–women at the
Parkersburg plant who’d given birth
to babies with eye deformities,
others reporting strange illnesses.
When he saw what DuPont had been
doing, he paused for a moment.
He saw that DuPont hadn’t
just ignored the red flags; it
had built a wall around them.
In 1981, after two workers’ babies were
born with eye defects, DuPont had quietly
moved pregnant staff off PFOA lines.
No public word, no recall.
Studies piling up in the
labs–cancer in rats, liver
damage–were stamped ‘confidential,’
locked away from prying eyes.
By 1984, it had tested Parkersburg’s
water and found sky-high PFOA
levels, yet told no one, claiming
its own safe limit was flexible.
When Bilott came knocking, DuPont sent
him 100,000 pages of documents and
reports, contracts, memos, and faxes,
hoping it would be too much for him,
or at least it would take him too
long to sift through, and perhaps his
colleagues would pull him off the project.
It almost did.
As you might imagine, few
people at Billot’s law firm were
particularly pleased with the young
lawyer’s interest in this case.
His firm thrived on corporate
clients, and there he was,
biting the hand that fed them.
DuPont fought back, naturally.
It commissioned a study with the
Environmental Protection Agency,
claiming the landfill was fine,
the cows’ deaths a fluke, Earl’s
fault, not the fault of the company.
It painted him as an incompetent
farmer who didn’t know his trade.
Bilott saw through it.
He kept pressing, demanding
more documents, and what he
uncovered next was staggering.
PFOA wasn’t just in Earl’s stream, it
was in the drinking water for 70,000
people in the Ohio River Valley,
stretching across West Virginia and Ohio.
This wasn’t a lone farmer’s
problem; it was a public health
crisis, hidden in plain sight.
The water that was killing the
cows was the same water that was
being drunk by tens of thousands
of unsuspecting nearby residents.
By 2001, Bilott escalated things.
He filed a class-action
lawsuit, representing everyone
whose water had been tainted.
It was a monumental shift; tens of
thousands of people, all potentially
poisoned by the same chemical
that made their pans nonstick.
DuPont doubled down, burying him
in legal motions and paperwork,
hoping he’d buckle under the weight.
But Bilott was relentless.
He worked late nights, poring over files,
building a case that couldn’t be ignored.
His family saw less of him, his
wife and son adjusting to a man
increasingly consumed by this
fight, but he couldn’t stop.
The evidence was too damning.
In 2004, after years of
wrangling, DuPont settled.
The figure was over $300 million, a
hefty sum, but Bilott had insisted on
something more valuable: the truth.
Part of the deal funded something called
the C8 Health Project, a massive study
to test the blood and health records
of 69,000 people in the affected area.
It took seven years, but the results,
which were finally released in
2011 and 2012, were unequivocal.
PFOA was linked to six diseases:
kidney cancer, testicular
cancer, thyroid disease, high
cholesterol, ulcerative colitis,
and pregnancy-induced hypertension.
This wasn’t guesswork; it was
science, and it was devastating.
Armed with this, Bilott
went back to court.
Between 2015 and 2017, he filed over
3,500 personal injury lawsuits for
individuals who’d suffered: people
with cancer, children with defects,
families shattered by illness.
DuPont and its spinoff, Chemours, settled
again in 2017, this time for $671 million.
It was a victory, of sorts,
financial compensation for thousands,
but Bilott still wasn’t done.
He’d learned something bigger:
PFOA, and its family of “forever
chemicals” called PFAS, didn’t go away.
They lingered in water, soil, and
blood forever, hence the name.
Studies showed the presence of these
chemicals in 99% of people worldwide, a
silent legacy of nonstick convenience.
In 2018, Bilott took his boldest step yet.
He filed a lawsuit against DuPont, 3M,
and others, this time for every American
with PFAS in their system; essentially,
a lawsuit on behalf of the whole country.
He wasn’t after damages, not yet,
but answers: a court-ordered panel to
study the full toll of these chemicals.
That case is still dragging
on, a testament to the scale
of what he’d uncovered.
Earl Tennant sadly didn’t live to see
it; he died of cancer in 2009, most
probably from the very poison he’d
fought, but his call to “Robbie” was
the thing that had started it all.
So what’s happened since then?
DuPont has paid out hundreds of millions,
and PFOA has been phased out in the US.
It's been replaced by alternatives
that are supposedly much less harmful.
But PFAS are still everywhere:
in rivers, wildlife, and,
almost certainly, you and me.
Fortunately, there is growing awareness
of the dangers of these chemicals and
more information on what can be done
to minimise your exposure to them.
Much like in previous decades, when
awareness grew about the dangers of
smoking, alcohol, and processed foods,
perhaps “forever chemicals” will be
the next thing the world wakes up to.
For Earl Tennant, for his cows, for
the countless children born with
birth defects and for the Parkersburg
residents who died of strange cancers,
unfortunately, it is too late.
For them, there truly was a hidden
cost to a cheap non-stick pan.
OK then, that is it for today's
episode on Rob Bilott, Earl Tennant,
and the fight against DuPont.
If you’re interested in diving
into this story, Rob Bilott wrote
an excellent book on the subject,
called Exposure, which a lot of the
material from this episode comes from.
There is also a movie about
this called Dark Waters, which
I would certainly recommend.
And there are a bunch of other interesting
websites and videos that talk more
about the safety levels of PFAS and have
some guidance on what you can do if you
want to minimise your exposure to them.
I’d just recommend googling
“PFAS” to find out more.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.